_pages/Organized_Conferences.md, before:

---
layout: archive
title: "Organized Conferences"
permalink: /Organized_Conferences/
author_profile: true
---

## INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY SOCIETY ANNUAL MEETING

<address>
 Georgetown University. Oct 27th-28th, 2023<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (Georgetown University)
</address>
[Read More](https://www.internationalpoliticaleconomysociety.org/past-conferences/2023) 

## ANALYZING THE ANTI-GLOBALIZATION BACKLASH

<address>
 Workshop in Florence, Italy, May 17-20, 2019<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra, Ed Mansfield, Helen Milner, and Leo Baccini
</address>

Read More

## POLITICAL ECONOMY OF EMERGING MARKET COUNTRIES: THE CHALLENGE OF DEVELOPING MORE HUMANE SOCIETIES

<address>
 Kolkata, Shantiniketan, and New Delhi, India. 2017<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (Georgetown University) and Helen V. Milner (Princeton University) with Biju Paul Abraham (Indian Institute of Management- Calcutta)
</address>

[Read More](/files/POLITICALECONOMYOFEMERGINGMARKETCOUNTRIES.pdf)

## INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY SOCIETY ANNUAL MEETING

<address>
 Georgetown University. 2014<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (Georgetown University)
</address>

Read More

## POLITICS OF THE CHANGING WORLD ECONOMY

<address>
 Sinquerim (Goa), India. 2013<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (Georgetown University) and Helen V. Milner (Princeton University) with Biju Paul Abraham (Indian Institute of Management- Calcutta)
</address>

[Read More](/files/POLITICSOFTHECHANGINGWORLDECONOMY.pdf)

## INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY COLLOQUIUM

<address>
 The Graduate School of Public and International Affairs (GSPIA), University of Pittsburgh, 2012<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (University of Pittsburgh)
</address>

[Read More](/files/INTERNATIONALPOLITICALECONOMYCOLLOQUIUM.pdf) 

## GLOBALIZATION AND THE POLITICS OF POVERTY AND INEQUALITY

<address>
 Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, 2011<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (University of Pittsburgh) and Ken Scheve (Yale University) with Rajeev Gowda (Indian Institute of Management- BANGALORE)
</address>

[Read More](/files/GLOBALIZATIONANDTHEPOLITICSOFPOVERTYANDINEQUALITY.pdf)

Commit message:

Organized_Conferences.md
uncapitalized and found missing links to 2014 annual meeting, still need to find workshop link

_pages/Organized_Conferences.md, after:

---
layout: archive
title: "Organized Conferences"
permalink: /Organized_Conferences/
author_profile: true
---

## International Political Economy Society Annual Meeting

<address>
 Georgetown University. Oct 27th-28th, 2023<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (Georgetown University)
</address>

[Read More](https://www.internationalpoliticaleconomysociety.org/past-conferences/2023) 

## Analyzing the Anti-Globalization Backlash

<address>
 Workshop in Florence, Italy, May 17-20, 2019<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra, Ed Mansfield, Helen Milner, and Leo Baccini
</address>

Read More

## Political Economy of Emerging Market Countries: The Challenge of Developing More Humane Societies

<address>
 Kolkata, Shantiniketan, and New Delhi, India. 2017<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (Georgetown University) and Helen V. Milner (Princeton University) with Biju Paul Abraham (Indian Institute of Management- Calcutta)
</address>

[Read More](/files/POLITICALECONOMYOFEMERGINGMARKETCOUNTRIES.pdf)

## International Political Economy Society Annual Meeting

<address>
 Georgetown University. 2014<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (Georgetown University)
</address>

[Read More](https://www.internationalpoliticaleconomysociety.org/past-conferences/2014) 

## Politics of the Changing World Economy

<address>
 Sinquerim (Goa), India. 2013<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (Georgetown University) and Helen V. Milner (Princeton University) with Biju Paul Abraham (Indian Institute of Management- Calcutta)
</address>

[Read More](/files/POLITICSOFTHECHANGINGWORLDECONOMY.pdf)

## International Political Economy Colloqium

<address>
 The Graduate School of Public and International Affairs (GSPIA), University of Pittsburgh, 2012<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (University of Pittsburgh)
</address>

[Read More](/files/INTERNATIONALPOLITICALECONOMYCOLLOQUIUM.pdf) 

## Globalization and the Politics of Poverty and Inequality

<address>
 Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, 2011<br /> Organizers: Nita Rudra (University of Pittsburgh) and Ken Scheve (Yale University) with Rajeev Gowda (Indian Institute of Management- BANGALORE)
</address>

[Read More](/files/GLOBALIZATIONANDTHEPOLITICSOFPOVERTYANDINEQUALITY.pdf)
